(boat crashing against waves)
♪
>> Narrator: POLAR EXPLORERS
HAVE AN UNPARALLELED WINDOW
ON THE WORKINGS OF OUR
PLANET.
RESEARCH IN THE POLAR REGIONS
REVEALED THE MECHANISMS OF
THE EARTH'S MAGNETIC FIELD,
THE PROPERTIES OF THE UPPER
ATMOSPHERE, AND THE EXISTENCE
OF THE HOLE IN THE OZONE
LAYER.
IN ANTARCTICA, CLAUDE LORIUS
MADE A DISCOVERY THAT ROCKED
THE WORLD.
HE CONCLUSIVELY PROVED THE
EXISTENCE OF GLOBAL WARMING.
TODAY, HE'S RETURNED TO THE
CONTINENT TO RECOVER THE
MEMORY THAT HE LOST IN AN
ACCIDENT.
♪
>> Narrator: CURIOUSLY, IT
WAS THE SCIENTIFIC KNOWLEDGE
THAT CAME BACK FIRST.
BUT TO REGAIN THE FULL MEMORY
OF HIS LIFE WITH ALL ITS
EXPERIENCES HE HAD TO RETRACE
THE STEPS OF HIS PAST
EXPEDITIONS.
>> Narrator: FOR LORIUS, THE
ADVENTURE BEGAN IN 1957.
HAVING FINISHED HIS PHYSICAL
SCIENCE STUDIES HE APPLIED TO
SPEND A YEAR IN A NEWLY BUILT
SCIENTIFIC BASE IN
ANTARCTICA, THE CHARCOT BASE.
♪
>> Narrator: DURING THIS
EXPEDITION, LORIUS WROTE THE
FIRST OF THE JOURNALS THAT
WOULD ACCOMPANY HIM
THROUGHOUT HIS ASTONISHING
JOURNEY.
(winds blowing)
>> Narrator: SCIENTISTS
STARTED TO BECOME INTERESTED
IN THE POLES IN THE 1950'S.
THE CHARCOT BASE WAS SET UP
TO UNDERSTAND THE INFLUENCE
OF THE ANTARCTIC ON THE
EARTH'S CLIMATE, AND TO
MEASURE POLAR MAGNETISM.
(sounds of machinery)
(winds blowing)
>> Narrator: THREE PEOPLE
WOULD ATTEMPT TO SPEND
THE WINTER AT THE SOUTH POLE,
STAYING ONE YEAR CUT
OFF FROM THE WORLD,
SURROUNDED BY ICE, JACQUES
DUBOIS, AN ENGINEER, AND THE
ONLY PERSON WITH POLAR
EXPERIENCE, CLAUDE LORIUS,
AND A YOUNG PHYSICIST
ROLAND SCHLICH.
THEIR FIRST TASK WAS TO DIG
TUNNELS FOR BASIC SURVIVAL
AND TO INSTALL THE
LABORATORIES.
(winds blowing)
>> Narrator: A WINDMILL AT
THE CENTER OF THE BASE
PROVIDED ENERGY.
NEXT TO IT, A METEOROLOGICAL
OBSERVATION TOWER MEASURED
THE TEMPERATURE AND THE
WIND SPEED.
EVERYTHING WAS IN PLACE FOR
THE TEAM TO START THEIR
EXPERIMENTS.
>> Narrator: POLAR WINTER
CAME TO THE BASE, BRINGING
WITH IT VIOLENT STORMS THAT
DESTROYED ALL EXTERNAL
EQUIPMENT, DEPRIVING THE BASE
OF RADIO CONTACT, THEIR ONLY
MEANS OF COMMUNICATION
WITH DUMONT D'URVILLE AND
THE WORLD.
FOR MORE THAN SEVEN WEEKS THE
THREE MEN COULDN'T EVEN TELL
THEIR FAMILIES THEY WERE
STILL ALIVE.
(radio beeping)
>> Narrator: LORIUS AND HIS
COLLEAGUES MANAGED TO
IMPROVISE A WAY TO PRODUCE A
SMALL ELECTRIC CURRENT AND
REASSURE THEIR COLLEAGUES AND
FAMILIES BY RADIO.
THEN THEY HAD TO SAVE THE
SCIENTIFIC PROGRAM.
♪
(machinery engine)
(people laughing)
♪
>> Narrator: THE EXPERIENCE
AFFECTED CLAUDE LORIUS
DEEPLY.
AT 26, HE REALIZED THAT HIS
PLACE WAS THERE DESPITE THE
HARDSHIPS AND EXTREME
CONDITIONS.
FROM THIS POINT ON, HE WOULD
NOT REST UNTIL HE RETURNED TO
THE SOUTH POLE.
ANTARCTICA HAD CHANGED HIM
FOREVER.
>> Narrator: IT WAS NOVEMBER
1959.
THE EXPERIMENT WAS A FIRST, A
TRIP OF 2,500 KILOMETERS IN
UNKNOWN TERRITORY.
FOR FOUR MONTHS, EIGHT MEN OF
DIFFERENT NATIONALITIES WOULD
LIVE TOGETHER, CLAUDE LORIUS,
THE ONLY FRENCHMEN, AN
AUSTRALIAN, SOME AMERICANS, A
NEW ZEALANDER, AND A
DUTCHMEN, FRANS VAN DER
HOEVEN, THE LEADER OF THE
EXPEDITION.
>> ALL OF US REALIZED THAT WE
WERE IN UNKNOWN TERRITORY
BECAUSE THAT WAS THE PURPOSE
OF THE TRIP, TO GO SOMEWHERE
WHERE NO ONE ELSE HAS BEEN
BEFORE, AND TO LOOK AROUND
AND MEASURE WHAT'S THERE.
BUT I DON'T THINK THAT WAS
OUR MAIN OBSESSION.
OUR MAIN OBSESSION WAS THE
EVERY DAY IRRITATION AND
EVERY DAY FEAR, HOW ARE WE
GOING TO GET THROUGH?
>> Narrator: THE UNHEATED
VEHICLES WERE THE EXPLORER'S
ONLY SHELTER, BOTH DURING THE
DAY AND AT NIGHT.
WHATEVER THE WEATHER, THE
CONVOY STOPPED EVERY 50
KILOMETERS.
THEY TOOK MEASUREMENTS AND
SAMPLES, AND SET OFF SMALL
EXPLOSIONS TO MEASURE THE
THICKNESS OF THE ICE.
(explosion)
(wind blowing)
THEIR GOAL WAS TO REACH THE
ICE CAP.
TO DO THAT, THEY HAD TO CLIMB
A 100-KILOMETER LONG GLACIER.
>> Narrator: LORIUS' GROUP
MANAGED TO AVOID THE
CREVASSES, BUT A LITTLE
FURTHER ON ANOTHER TEAM WAS
LESS FORTUNATE AND LOST
SEVERAL OF IT'S MEN.
(wind blowing)
AT TIMES, BLIZZARDS OBSCURED
ALL VISIBILITY.
THEY HAD TO STOP FOR DAYS, OR
EVEN WEEKS.
EVERYTHING WAS DICTATED BY
THE WEATHER.
>> ANTARCTICA IS NOT A
PLEASANT ENVIRONMENT.
IT IS A PUNISHING
ENVIRONMENT, AND IF YOU ARE
OUT ON THE PLATEAU YOU NEVER
FEEL RELAXED.
YOU CANNOT GO OUT FOR A WALK
BECAUSE YOU WILL BE
SUFFERING.
SLEEPING AT NIGHT IS AN IFFY
PROPOSITION.
(wind blowing)
>> Narrator: THE EVENING MEAL
WAS A TIME FOR RELAXATION.
THE COOK, WHO WAS ALSO THE
TRIP'S PSYCHOLOGIST, WOULD
DISCREETLY START THE TAPE
RECORDER.
HE STUDIED THE SMALL GROUP AS
THEY ENDURED THE EXTREME
LIVING CONDITIONS.
THESE STUDIES WOULD LATER BE
USED TO UNDERSTAND HOW SPACE
CREWS FUNCTION AND TO SELECT
ASTRONAUTS.
♪
>> OUR LITTLE CONTRIBUTION TO
THE ANTARCTIC HISTORY ENDED
IN 1960, AND AS YOU CAN SEE
ON THIS MAP THERE ARE SEVERAL
MOUNTAIN PEAKS THAT HAVE THE
NAMES OF EXPEDITIONARY
MEMBERS.
AND ONE OF THEM IS OF COURSE
CLAUDE LORIUS, AND ANOTHER IS
MOUNT VAN DER HOEVEN, IT IS
MY NAME.
AND THERE IS A LITTLE PLACE
THAT HAS THE NAME OF THE
SNOW CAPS, THE VEHICLES THAT
WE HAD.
>> Narrator: THE MOUNTAIN
RANGES DISCOVERED BY THE
EXPEDITION PROVED TO BE
IMPOSSIBLE.
THE TEAM HAD TO BE EVACUATED
BY PLANE AND EVERYTHING LEFT
BEHIND, EXCEPT FOR THE
PRECIOUS SAMPLES.
FOR LORIUS, THE EXPEDITION
HAD BEEN VERY POSITIVE.
IN THE ANTARCTIC ICE, HE HAD
FOUND A WAY TO ESTABLISH PAST
TEMPERATURES.
A NEW PATH OPENED UP FOR HIM,
AND ANOTHER MEETING WITH
JEAN JOUZEL.
>> Narrator: LORIUS PROVED
THAT THE PROPORTION OF HEAVY
HYDROGEN IN THE ICE VARIED
ACCORDING TO THE TEMPERATURE
AT THE TIME THE ICE FORMED.
THIS GAVE SCIENTISTS A NEW
TOOL, THE ISOTOPIC
THERMOMETER.
THANKS TO THIS TOOL, THEY
COULD ESTABLISH PAST
TEMPERATURES AT A GIVEN SITE
JUST FROM TAKING SAMPLES OF
ICE THERE.
♪
FOR LORIUS, THE '60'S LOOKED
PROMISING.
HIS INTUITION GRADUALLY LED
HIM TO ANOTHER DISCOVERY,
A NEW TOOL TO RECONSTRUCT
THE CLIMATE OF THE PAST.
>> WELL, IT'S ON NEW YEAR'S
DAY, WE WILL REMEMBER THIS,
TO NEW YEAR'S DAY,
NOW HAVE A SIP.
>> THANK YOU.
ONE OF MY FAVORITE STORIES IN
THIS IS THAT IS THE FIRST
TIME WE SAW THAT WE COULD NOT
ONLY RECONSTRUCT THE CLIMATE
FROM ICICLES BUT ALSO THE
COMPOSITION OF THE AIR.
IT WAS DRINKING.
>> DRINKING WHISKEY?
>> A PIECE OF ICE WHICH CAME
FROM THE CORE, AND WE THOUGHT
WHY SHOULDN'T WE TRY TO
PRESERVE A LOT OF THE
COMPOSITION OF THE ICE.
>> IS THAT WHERE THAT CAME
FROM?
>> YES, BUT IT TOOK, OF
COURSE AS YOU KNOW, MANY
YEARS TO PROVE THAT THIS WAS
THE IDEA.
>> WHEN I FIRST CAME TO
ANTARCTICA, GLACIOLOGY WAS
PROBABLY THE LEAST IMPORTANT
SUBJECT IT SEEMED.
>> NO, NO!
>> WHEN I FIRST CAME, NO
SERIOUSLY, AND NOW IT'S ONE
OF THE MOST IMPORTANT.
>> YES.
>> YES, BUT SERIOUSLY WHEN I
FIRST CAME...
>> I DON'T KNOW HOW LONG IT
WILL BE LIKE THIS.
>> BUT OBVIOUSLY IT'S VERY
IMPORTANT NOW.
SO IT WAS ALL BECAUSE OF
WHISKEY THAT WE NOW
UNDERSTAND WHY THE GLACIERS
WERE.
(laughter)
>> Narrator: LORIUS HAD THE
IDEA THAT THE AIR TRAPPED IN
THE ICE CONTAINED PRECIOUS
INFORMATION.
BUT IT WOULD BE YEARS BEFORE
HE AND HIS TEAM COULD ANALYZE
THE COMPOSITION OF THE GASES
IN THE BUBBLES.
>> Narrator: THE SNOW THAT
FALLS PILES UP AND IS
GRADUALLY TRANSFORMED
INTO ICE.
THE OLDEST ICE IS FOUND DEEP
BELOW THE CENTRAL REGIONS OF
ANTARCTICA.
LORIUS KNEW THAT THEY HAD TO
SEND SCIENTIFIC EXPEDITIONS
TO THESE REMOTE REGIONS WHICH
WERE THE MOST PROMISING, BUT
ALSO THE HARDEST TO REACH.
HE MOUNTED A NEW EXPEDITION
TO TRY TO DRILL IN DOME C IN
THE CENTER OF ANTARCTICA.
THE EXPEDITION STARTED OUT,
BUT PROGRESS WAS SLOWER THAN
EXPECTED.
THE VEHICLES, THOUGH
IMPROVED, COULDN'T COPE WITH
THE RUGGED TERRAIN.
FUEL CONSUMPTION HAD BEEN
UNDER ESTIMATED.
THE SCIENTIFIC PROGRAM WAS
TOO AMBITIOUS.
IT BECAME APPARENT THAT THEY
COULDN'T REACH THEIR GOAL
BEFORE THE POLAR WINTER CUT
OFF THEIR RETURN.
THEY HAD TO TURN BACK.
IT WAS THE START OF THE '70'S.
LORIUS REFUSED TO ACCEPT
DEFEAT.
FOR THREE YEARS HE HAD BEEN
SEARCHING FOR A WAY TO GET TO
DOME C.
IN THE END, IT WAS THE US
NAVY WHO DROPPED HIM THERE BY
PLANE.
>> Narrator: THE SITE
PROVED IDEAL.
PRELIMINARY STUDIES WERE
SUCCESSFUL.
EVERYTHING WAS IN PLACE TO
START DRILLING THE FOLLOWING
YEAR.
>> SOUTH POLE, THIS IS DOME
CHARLIE, SOUTH POLE.
>> Narrator: LORIUS ARRANGED
FOR THE US NAVY PLANE THAT
WAS TO COLLECT THEM TO BRING
SOME OF THE NECESSARY
MATERIALS, WHICH WOULD BE
STORED ON-SITE, AWAITING THE
FOLLOWING YEAR'S MISSION.
THE EVACUATION OF THE TEAM
COULD NOW START.
(warning buzzer)
THE PLANE FAILED TO TAKE OFF.
FORTUNATELY THERE WERE NO
CASUALTIES, BUT A SECOND
PLANE STILL HAD TO BE SENT.
(airplane engines)
AFTER THIS NEW FAILURE THE
SITUATION BECAME CRITICAL.
THE US NAVY NOW HAD ONLY ONE
PLANE LEFT CAPABLE OF LANDING
ON THE SITE.
IT WAS RUSHED TO THE SCENE.
THIS WAS THEIR LAST CHANCE.
(airplane engines)
THE EVACUATION SUCCEEDED, BUT
THE DRILLING PLANNED FOR THE
FOLLOWING YEAR WAS CANCELLED.
MEN COULD NOT BE TAKEN TO
DOME C IF NO RESCUE PLANE WAS
AVAILABLE SHOULD THE WORST
HAPPEN.
LORIUS SAW HIS RESEARCH
STOPPED, HIS DREAM SHATTERED.
IT WAS AN IMPASS.
♪
BUT LORIUS RECEIVED SOME
UNEXPECTED SUPPORT.
THE AMERICAN NATIONAL SCIENCE
FOUNDATION DECIDED TO REPAIR
THE DAMAGED PLANES ON-SITE.
THREE YEARS, THREE SOUTHERN
SUMMERS WOULD BE NEEDED TO
COMPLETE THE REPAIRS.
NOVEMBER 1977, 37,000 TONS OF
MATERIALS WERE DELIVERED TO
DOME C.
THE DRILLING COULD BEGIN
AT LAST.
(machine noises)
FOR LORIUS AND HIS TEAM IN
GRENOBLE, THE DRILLING MARKED
A TURNING POINT.
ACCESS TO VERY OLD ICE,
COMBINED WITH THE USE OF
ISOTOPIC THERMOMETERS WAS
GOING TO ENABLE THEM TO
ESTABLISH TEMPERATURES FROM
THOUSANDS OF YEARS AGO.
LITTLE BY LITTLE, BY
EXTRACTING THE ICE FROM DEEP
DOWN, THEY WOULD BE ABLE TO
CHART CLIMATE CHANGES OVER A
PERIOD OF SEVERAL THOUSAND
YEARS.
AN ADDITIONAL DISCOVERY WOULD
ALLOW THEM TO REFINE THEIR
DATING.
♪
>> Narrator: BUT FRENCH
RESOURCES AND TECHNIQUES
WEREN'T UP TO DEEPER
DRILLING.
AT THAT TIME ONLY THE SOVIETS
HAD THE NECESSARY EXPERIENCE.
LORIUS KNEW THIS.
HE VISITED THEIR BASE,
VOSTOK, SITUATED AT AN
ALTITUDE OF 3,600 METERS IN
THE COLDEST PLACE ON
THE EARTH.
THIS IS THE HEIGHT OF THE
COLD WAR.
OFFICIALLY NO COOPERATION WAS
POSSIBLE BETWEEN THE FRENCH
AND THE SOVIET TEAMS.
BUT THE GLACIOLOGISTS WORLD
IS A SMALL ONE IN WHICH EVERY
ONE IS A PIONEER AND SUPPORT
IS ALWAYS GIVEN.
LORIUS KNEW HIS SOVIET
COUNTERPART, VLADIMIR
KOTLYAKOV, DIRECTOR OF THE
MOSCOW GEOGRAPHIC INSTITUTE.
♪
>> Narrator: MUCH MANEUVERING
WAS REQUIRED ON THE PART OF
CLAUDE LORIUS IN FRANCE AND
VLADIMIR KOTLYAKOV IN THE
SOVIET UNION.
FINALLY, ON THE 31ST OF
DECEMBER 1984, LORIUS AND HIS
YOUNG COLLEAGUES ARRIVED AT
THE VOSTOK STATION, JUST IN
TIME FOR THE NEW YEAR
CELEBRATIONS.
AFTER SO MANY YEARS, LORIUS
COULDN'T WAIT.
THE NEXT DAY HE WENT TO WORK
IN THE COLD ROOM BEFORE
BREAKFAST AND GAVE AN
ENTHUSIASTIC INTERVIEW TO
RUSSIAN TV.
♪
>> Narrator: THE COLD ROOM
CONTAINS ALL THE CORES
ACCUMULATED HERE SINCE
DRILLING BEGAN IN THE 1950'S.
BUT THE RUSSIANS WERE ONLY
TESTING OIL DRILLING
TECHNIQUES.
THEY HAD NO WAY OF
ANALYZING ICE.
IT WAS LORIUS' ISOTOPIC
THERMOMETER AND HIS AIR
BUBBLE ANALYSIS THAT ENABLED
THE VOSTOK ICE TO TELL
ITS STORY.
RELAYS WERE ORGANIZED BETWEEN
THE BASE AND GRENOBLE WHERE
THE SAMPLES WERE ANALIZED.
LORIUS USED THE TRIPS TO
TRAIN A NEW GENERATION OF
RESEARCHERS, ONE OF WHOM
WOULD REPLACE HIM ON
FUTURE EXPEDITIONS,
JEAN-ROBERT PETIT.
>> Narrator: IT WAS THEN THAT
LORIUS REALIZED THAT THE
EARTH'S CLIMATE WAS LESS
STABLE THAN IT HAD BEEN
THOUSANDS OF YEARS AGO.
HIS INTUITION TOLD HIM THAT
HUMAN ACTIVITY WAS CHANGING
THE CLIMATE DUE TO CARBON
DIOXIDE OMISSIONS, BUT AS
YET, HE LACKED PROOF.
HE HAD TO FIND A WAY TO
RETURN TO VOSTOK TO
CONSOLIDATE THE RESULTS,
♪
AT VOSTOK, HALF THE ICE CAP
REMAINED TO BE DRILLED, A
VERITABLE GOLD MINE FOR
LORIUS.
BUT THIS WAS 1991.
THE COMMUNIST REGIME HAD
COLLAPSED, AND WITH IT THE
RESOURCES TO FINANCE THE
POLAR BASE.
THE DRILL OPERATORS WERE NO
LONGER BEING PAID BY THEIR
ADMINISTRATION.
VOSTOK WAS ABOUT TO CLOSE.
>> Narrator: RUSSIA SLOWLY
REORGANIZED ITSELF.
ECONOMIC ACTIVITY PICKED UP.
THE ADMINISTRATION WAS
REBUILT AND WAS ABLE TO PAY
THE DRILL OPERATORS AGAIN.
LORIUS TURNED 60.
HE REMAINED IN OVER ALL
CONTROL OF OPERATIONS BUT NO
LONGER TRAVELED TO THE BASE.
JEAN-ROBERT PETIT TOOK HIS
PLACE ON-SITE.
>> Narrator: THE LACK OF
RESOURCES ON-SITE CONTINUED
TO BE FELT.
THEY HAD TO MAKE DUE WITH
NEXT TO NOTHING, SOMETHING
THE RUSSIAN TECHNICIANS WERE
PARTICULARLY GOOD AT.
AS BOTH HANDYMEN AND HIGHLY
TRAINED ENGINEERS, THEY
MANAGED TO REPAIR THEIR
FREQUENT MECHANICAL
BREAKDOWNS AND SOLVE THE
TECHNICAL PROBLEMS POSED BY A
DRILL HOLE THREE THOUSAND
METERS DEEP.
♪
>> Narrator: IN GRENOBLE,
LORIUS, REYNAUD, JOUZEL,
PETIT, AND A NEW GENERATION
OF RESEARCHERS CONTINUED
THEIR STUDY OF PAST CLIMATES.
THEY'D SOON RECONSTRUCT THE
CLIMATE OVER THE LAST
400,000 YEARS.
♪
400,000 YEARS REPRESENTS FOUR
CLIMATIC CYCLES BETWEEN
GLACIAL AND INTER-GLACIAL
PERIODS.
THE EVIDENCE CONFIRMED THE
REGULARITIES AS WELL AS THE
EXCEPTIONS.
THIS WAS THE PROOF THEY
NEEDED.
LORIUS' TEAM COULD SHOW WITH
CERTAINTY THAT FOR THE FIRST
TIME IN CLIMATE HISTORY THE
REGULAR OSCILATION IN
TEMPERATURE HAD BEEN BROKEN.
(footsteps in snow)
>> Narrator: IN ORDER TO
DEEPEN OUR UNDERSTANDING OF
THE CLIMATIC MACHINE, AND
THUS CONVINCE THE
POLITICIANS, LORIUS BELIEVES
THE RESEARCH MUST CONTINUE.
ON THE EVE OF HIS RETIREMENT,
LORIUS IS USING HIS
REPUTATION, HIS SCIENTIFIC
REWARDS, AND HIS NEW
APPOINTMENT AS A MEMBER OF
THE ACADMIE FRANCAISE TO
ALLOW YOUNGER COLLEAGUES TO
CONTINUE POLAR RESEARCH.
♪
>> Narrator: SEVERAL DRILL
HOLES HAVE BEEN INITIATED IN
ANTARCTICA.
ONE OF THE MOST SPECTACULAR
IS AT DOME C WHERE 30 YEARS
EARLIER LORIUS SANK HIS
FIRST HOLE.
THIS IS THE EPICA PROJECT.
♪
IT'S 2003.
EIGHT THOUSAND YEARS OF
CLIMATE HISTORY HAVE BEEN
GLEANED FROM THE SAMPLES
COLLECTED AT DOME C.
ANALYSIS OF THE CURVES ONCE
AGAIN PROVES LORIUS'
PREDICTIONS.
ALL OF THESE DATA CONVERGE TO
SHOW THAT THE CLIMATE IS
CHANGING AND THAT THIS NEW
DYNAMIC IS DUE TO HUMAN
ACTIVITY.
♪